---
title: "#NoMoreLyes"
supporters: "6.4K"
petitionUrl: "https://levelup.yourmovement.org/p/no-more-lyes"
emoji: "💇🏾"
featured: true
order: 1
status: "active"
excerpt: "#NoMoreLyes Campaign The #NoMoreLyes campaign is a feminist campaign led by Level Up challenging beauty brands to remove toxic chemicals from hair products used by Black women. Research has linked chemical hair relaxers to increased risks of breast c"
---

#NoMoreLyes Campaign The #NoMoreLyes campaign is a feminist campaign led by Level Up challenging beauty brands to remove toxic chemicals from hair products used by Black women. Research has linked chemical hair relaxers to increased risks of breast cancer, uterine cancer, fibroids and other serious health conditions. Yet major beauty corporations continue to deny responsibility. Level Up’s No More Lyes campaign demands accountability, transparency and an end to products that put Black women’s health at risk. Aim Force big beauty brands to remove cancerous chemicals from Black women’s hair products Why? Millions of Black women around the world use hair relaxers, chemical hair straightening creams, for several reasons: some find it makes their hair easier to manage; some do it to avoid hair discrimination at school or work; some of us just prefer it that way. However, recent studies have shown that use of hair relaxers is linked to increased risk in breast cancer, fibroids, uterine cancer and other serious illnesses. How the #NoMoreLyes Campaign began In July 2021, Oxford University published research which found that long-term use of lye-based relaxers is linked to a 30% increased breast cancer risk for Black women . Lye (sodium hydroxide) is the chemical used to unblock drains. Many Black women understand the risk of scalp burns but most have no idea that hair relaxers could be detrimental to our health. L’Oréal is one of the biggest manufacturers of hair relaxers in the world through its ownership of Dark & Lovely and SoftSheen Carson. Level Up found that lye is present even in their products labelled “no lye” – including those designed for children. So even when Black women think they are making a healthier, more conscious decision, they’re being lied to. We don’t accept this. Big beauty brands like L’Oréal must take responsibility for the harm caused by their products, and remove toxic chemicals from hair relaxers. The journey so far 2021 In response to a growing body of research linking the use of hair relaxers to a higher risk of serious illnesses, Level Up launched the #NoMoreLyes campaign demanding that beauty brands like L’Oréal commit to removing lye (sodium hydroxide) and other dangerous ingredients from Black women and children’s hair relaxers. Sodium hydroxide is the stuff used to unblock drains. The UK Health Security Agency categorises sodium hydroxide as a “highly corrosive alkali. Toxic and corrosive by ingestion, inhalation, dermal and ocular exposure”, and the Health and Safety Executive classifies sodium hydroxide as a category 1A skin corrosive. Within a week, the petition had 4,000 signatures and received news coverage in The Independent, gal-dem, Loose Women and cosmetic beauty news. In August, more than 3,000 Level Up supporters sent emails directly to the Managing Director of L’Oréal urging him to make hair relaxers safe to use or remove them from the shelves. 2022 In March 2022, 700 #NoMoreLyes supporters sent L’Oréal a r
